🐧 Experiment: Basic Linux Commands, Run Levels & Help Utilities
🎯 Aim
To practice essential Linux commands, understand system run levels (systemd targets), and effectively use Linux help utilities.

📌 Objectives
Learn fundamental command-line operations in Linux

Understand system run levels (systemd targets)

Use help utilities like man and --help

Improve efficiency with command-line auto‑completion

📖 Theory
💻 Linux Command Line Interface (CLI)
The Linux CLI allows users to interact with the operating system by typing commands. Compared to graphical interfaces, it offers faster, more powerful, and more efficient control, especially for system administration and automation tasks.

⚙️ Procedure
Logged into the Linux virtual machine.

Opened the terminal application.

Executed basic system commands to explore the environment:

pwd – prints the current working directory

ls – lists files and directories

whoami – shows the logged‑in username

date – displays the current date and time

uptime – shows how long the system has been running

Navigated between directories using:

cd /home – moves to the /home directory

cd ~ – returns to the home directory

Accessed manual pages to understand command usage:

man ls – shows the manual for ls

man cd – shows the manual for cd

Pressed q to exit the manual page.

Used help options for commands:

ls --help

systemctl --help

Checked the current system run level / target using:

runlevel – displays previous and current run levels

systemctl get-default – shows the default systemd target

Switched between system targets:

systemctl isolate multi-user.target – switches to command‑line mode (no GUI)

systemctl isolate graphical.target – switches back to GUI mode

Executed traditional runlevel commands (using SysV init style):

sudo init 3 – changes to runlevel 3 (multi‑user without GUI)

sudo init 5 – changes to runlevel 5 (multi‑user with GUI)

Practiced auto‑completion by typing part of a command or path and pressing the Tab key.

Cleared the terminal screen using:

clear

🛠️ Configuration Commands Used
The following commands were practiced during this experiment:
pwd, ls, cd, whoami, date, uptime, man, systemctl, runlevel, init, clear

📊 Results
Basic Linux commands were executed successfully.

Manual pages and --help utilities worked as expected.

The system run level / target was identified and changed correctly.

Commands were executed efficiently, including auto‑completion and screen clearing.
