🧪 Experiment: Exploring Virtual Terminals, Display Managers, and the X Window System
🎯 Aim
To explore virtual terminals, display managers, the X Window System, and switching between text-based and graphical interfaces in Linux.

📌 Objectives
To understand the concept of virtual terminals in Linux.
To switch between multiple terminal sessions.
To study display managers and graphical login mechanisms.
To identify X clients and window managers.
📖 Theory
🔹 Virtual Terminals
Linux provides multiple virtual terminals (VTs), allowing users to run multiple sessions simultaneously in text mode. These are especially useful for troubleshooting and system recovery.

Common shortcuts:

Ctrl + Alt + F1 to F6 – Text-based terminals
Ctrl + Alt + F7 (or sometimes F1/F2 depending on distro) – Graphical interface
🔹 Display Manager
A display manager provides a graphical login interface and manages user sessions.

Examples: GDM (GNOME), LightDM, SDDM (KDE).
🔹 X Window System (X11)
The X Window System (X11) is responsible for handling graphical display, keyboard input, and mouse interactions. It enables graphical applications to run on Linux systems.

🔹 X Clients & Window Managers
X Clients: Graphical applications (browsers, editors) that communicate with the X server.
Window Manager: Controls the appearance, placement, and behavior of windows (e.g., GNOME, KDE, Xfce, Openbox).
🛠️ Step-by-Step Procedure
Login: Logged into the Linux system and opened the terminal.
Identify Terminal: Checked the current terminal:
tty
Switch Session: Switched to another virtual terminal using Ctrl + Alt + F2. Logged in again to verify access.
Return to GUI: Switched back to the graphical interface using Ctrl + Alt + F1 or Ctrl + Alt + F7.
Monitor Users: Checked logged-in users:
who
w
Display Manager Status: Checked the status of the display manager:
systemctl status gdm
Environment Check: Verified the X session environment variable:
echo $DISPLAY
Process List: Listed X-related processes:
ps -e | grep X
💻 Configuration Commands
The following commands were used during the experiment: tty, who, w, systemctl, echo $DISPLAY, ps, startx

📊 Observations / Results
Successfully switched between multiple virtual terminals.
Identified the current terminal using tty.
Displayed logged-in users accurately.
Verified the status of the display manager.
Confirmed the X session environment variable.
Displayed running X-related processes.
✅ Conclusion
The experiment was successfully completed. Virtual terminals, display managers, X clients, and window managers were explored effectively. This experiment provided practical understanding of Linux system interfaces and graphical session management.
